tonight is judges whereas of America's
only formal muumuus judges occupy an
exalted position in American life but as
important as they are we tend not to
think about them very much unless one of
them makes news as happened earlier this
month a federal court last month lifted
Alabama's ban on same-sex marriage but
Roy Moore the state Supreme Court Chief
Justice ordered state judges to ignore
the federal ruling yes
Alabama judge Roy Moore refused an order
to let gay people marry living up to his
state slogan
Alabama boldly refusing to accept
diversity and the inevitable since 1819
now - just out of interest what was his
judicial reasoning for such a decision
I think the gay marriage is an
alteration of the definition of marriage
in the United States Supreme Court does
not have the authority or the federal
courts do not have the authority to
interpret a word that disputes the
Constitution hold on hold on not only
can the Supreme Court override a state
that's basically its job that's not
telling dill it can't ruin any foodstuff
it comes into contact with
that's what dill does get out of
everyone's food till you are filthy weed
your wreckingball know him up you might
be thinking how did that man get to
become the highest judicial officer in
the state well like eighty-five percent
of state judges in America he was
elected 39 states hold elections for
judges and America is virtually alone in
doing this in fact there's only one
other country on Earth that does it on
this scale you can guess which you're
wrong it's Bolivia hey a country you
think about so little you haven't even
realized that's not Bolivia this
Bolivia actually actually that's still
not Bolivia this is Bolivia or is it or
if it this this game is never not going
to be fun no
America has been elected judges since
the early 1800s
and the thing is it all began from a
good impulse judicial elections
originated as a reform measure so people
were concerned that you know judges were
being selected behind closed doors there
wasn't any kind of public accountability
okay and public accountability sounds
great the problem is for many judges
nowadays there's almost none of that
most run unopposed last year in LA
County 150 out of 151 incumbent judges
ran on a post and come on they can at
least go through the motions of
pretending there was another candidate
just throw a robe on a Pelican and tape
a gavel to his wing or I'll tell you
what you're in LA just pretend you're
considering Blake Lively for the job
movie studios do that all the time and
the problem is whenever a judge does
face a challenger they have to run like
a politician and that's why many states
are subjected to the bizarre spectacle
of ads like these hi I'm Allan Lauri I'm
running for our Supreme Court it's law
free is in law and free this is my house
come on in there's the kitchen something
smells good
my wife Kelli law free in our son
justice lottery that's right justice
slot yeah yeah I called my son justice I
call my dog preamble and I call my penis
the gavel vote for me boom boom boom
boom boom
and sometimes campaigns opt to sell a
judge with sheer catchiness there's a
judge they call Paul Newby he's got
criminals on the run
Paul steely stares got him running
scared Neal take him down one by one
Paul Newby he's a tough old judge
respected everywhere Paul knew be just
as tough but fair Paul knew be criminals
best beware what just happened am I
supposed to vote for that man or root
for him to catch them Duke boys and look
I know what you're thinking could any
commercial be less relevant to a judge's
qualifications for the job I give you
Gregg beard search and rescue and
Rapides Parish
here's volunteer diver Gregg beard we
have to know what we're doing study try
trust our team we do this because it
helps people Gregg beard for Rapides
Parish District Court judge when times
are tough this dive team stands ready of
course of course it makes sense because
when I'm choosing a judge the only thing
I really care about is who can hold
their breath the longest here's the
thing all three of the men in those ads
won their elections their judge is now
judging people and the stupid ads are
actually the least problematic what's
far more worrisome is when judges run
ads like these without blinking an eye
judge kenneth ingram sentence the killer
to die michael oyster is the only
candidate for judge who has put our
worst criminals on death row my
privilege to sentence with a life in
prison without wait it's your privilege
at best it's your duty then there are
some jobs where that kind of
occupational relish is inappropriate if
you're having a colonoscopy you don't
want to hear it is my privilege to
insert this camera deep inside your anus
the problem with an elected judiciary is
sometimes the right decision is neither
easy nor popular and yet campaigns force
judges to look over their shoulder on
every ruling because while political
attack ads can be aggressive judicial
attack ads can be downright horrifying I
was convicted of stabbing my victims
with the kitchen knife shooting my
ex-girlfriend and murdering her sister
in front of our child of sexual assault
on a mom and her ten-year-old daughter
and I'd slashed their throats on appeal
Justice Thomas Kilbride sided with us
over law enforcement or victims oh my
god good luck getting back into whatever
you were watching after seeing that
commercial Sheldon and his friends are
gonna have to get into some pretty wacky
mishaps
like the memory of that away now now
what those evil shadows are saying
sounds awful but here's the problem none
of those three men were actually set
free by Judge killbride but in each case
he merely questioned the legality of
procedural points in their trials which
is a judge's job but there's no room in
campaigns for nuance that's why you
don't see bumper stickers reading
justice is complicated requiring the
sublimation of our baser instincts which
though difficult is the only thing that
separates us from the Annika piece
Kilbride 2015 the danger rates though
the danger is if ads like those get
inside judge's heads and make the rule
more harshly to protect themselves in
the future and the problem is that does
happen there are some academic studies
that have suggested that judges do
change their behavior so for example in
election years if you look at judges
sentencings decisions
judges tender tend to be harder on crime
that's terrifying
because you shouldn't be sitting in a
prison going how did you get 15 months
for public urination well you know it
was October in an election year I should
have known what I was getting into
and it's not like appointing judges is
the perfect system we can all name one
that we don't like and it's usually
Antonin Scalia oh oh oh no no no no not
all in his more palatable form a bulldog
dressed as Antonin Scalia
elections are inherently compromising
because campaigns cost money
and that money has to come from
somewhere which leads to the horrifying
spectacle of judges hitting up lawyers
for donations for attorneys like Jules
oldsman this is the most expensive time
of the year election season is when
lawyers like him have to dig deepest
into their wallets that's because every
hour or so he'll get a call from a
judges campaign looking for a
contribution it's very hard to say no
it's impossible to say no judge is
asking lawyers to give them campaign
money is the definition of a conflict of
interest
think about it giving money to two
judges wouldn't be acceptable in a state
fair squash growing competition oh
really
Gladys gets first place how much money
did you give you because I know that
that knobbly pile of is not the
nicest course you've seen this afternoon
it looks like the Jolly Green giant's
dick fell off and everyone here knows it
Gladys everyone knows it sometimes
judges will even shake lawyers down
after the election is over democratic
appeals court judge Jim sharp sent a
passive-aggressive email to a Texas
attorney who had donated to his
unsuccessful opponent which said I trust
that you will see your way clear to
contribute to my campaign and in an
amount reflective of the $2,000
contribution you made towards my defeat
wink emoticon and the fact that he's
shaking him down isn't even the part of
that email I find most offensive
it's the wink emoticon I guess we should
all just be glad he stopped short of
going full wink emoji
incredibly judges can even target
potential future defendants as a
Philadelphia traffic court judge
candidate named Wendy Singletary did and
a biker rally
do all judges do this all the divorce
judge is going to IQs right now saying
look I know some of you guys won't last
who's got 50 bucks for me go now
you'll be glad to hear that that judge
is no longer on the bench although it
wasn't for taking those contributions
but rather because he allegedly once
showed cell phone pictures of his
genitals to a colleague and accusation
that yielded their disciplinary hearing
whose magnificent opinion featured the
phrase the judicial penis and determined
he had intentionally groomed his penis
for photography now that's not really
relevant to the story that I'm telling
right now but I think you'll agree you
had to know that you deserve to know
that and look it gets a guess well step
one one step was judge is also
frequently benefits from campaign money
given by businesses and special
interests and while they may claim that
that doesn't affect them multiple
studies have suggested otherwise we
looked at the Ohio Supreme Court and
asked the question of how often they
vote for contributors who appear before
them and the answer was overall about 70
percent of the time and in the case of
one justice Harris O'Donnell 91 percent
of the time now justice O'Donnell says
that there was no connection there but
the point is he still said sure why not
in response to people who gave him money
91 percent of the time and the only
other person who does that is Nicolas
Cage that's the only it's been a
disaster Nicolas it's been a romp
but it's been a disaster
and to be fair many judges don't like
this system even Ohio Supreme Court
justice Paul Pfeiffer has said I never
felt so much like a hooker down by the
bus station in any race I've ever been
in as I did in a judicial race which
does explain Pfeiffer's campaign slogan
justice for all no kissing on the mouth
though I have to say something for the
man I fall in love with and increasingly
since citizens united PACs
and super PACs are getting involved in
fact remember the banjo ad the one
you're still humming in your head that
was sponsored by a PAC called the North
Carolina judicial coalition whose
founders include businesses like r.j.
Reynolds and remember this one I was
convicted of stabbing my victims with a
kitchen knife shooting my ex-girlfriend
and murder her sister in front of our
child that was sponsored by something
called just PAC whose donors include
Koch Industries the US Chamber of
Commerce and John Deere PAC yes the
people who make tractors also apparently
helped make judicial decisions for the
people of Illinois and look when you
have a system where judges are serenaded
with banjos shakedown lawyers for money
compare themselves to prostitutes and
live in constant fear of tractors you
have a problem because faith in a strong
independent judiciary is essential for a
civilized society without it were
settling disputes either in Thunder
domes or via the purge and I still can't
work out how that thing works are there
any rules are timezones a factor in the
purge is the East Coast purge an hour
before the purge Central Time in which
case nobody tweet about it it spoils it
for everyone look if we're going to keep
electing judges we may have to alter our
idea of what justice is in fact at the
very least to be a bit more
representative we should tweak the
blindfolded lady holding scales to put a
tip jar in our hand and give her a pink
winking emoji for a face
you